DIANEAL PD-2 WITH DEXTROSE (dextrose monohydrate, sodium chloride, sodium lactate, calcium chloride, and magnesium chloride) injection, solution 

DESCRIPTION

Dianeal PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solutions are sterile, nonpyrogenic solutions in UltraBag containers for intraperitoneal administration only. They contain no bacteriostatic or antimicrobial agents.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

None known.

WARNINGS

Not for Intravenous Injection.

Use aseptic technique. Contamination of Luer lock connector may result in peritonitis.

An improper clamping sequence may result in infusion of air into the peritoneum.

Peritoneal dialysis should be done with great care, if at all, in patients with a number of conditions, including disruption of the peritoneal membrane or diaphragm by surgery or trauma, extensive adhesions, bowel distention, undiagnosed abdominal disease, abdominal wall infection, hernias or burns, fecal fistula or colostomy, tense ascites, obesity, large polycystic kidneys, recent aortic graft replacement, lactic acidosis, and severe pulmonary disease. When assessing peritoneal dialysis as the mode of therapy in such extreme situations, the benefits to the patient must be weighed against the possible complications.

An accurate fluid balance record must be kept and the weight of the patient carefully monitored to avoid over or under hydration with severe consequences, including congestive heart failure, volume depletion, and shock.

Excessive use of Dianeal PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solution with 4.25% dextrose during a peritoneal dialysis treatment can result in significant removal of water from the patient.
Stable patients undergoing maintenance peritoneal dialysis should have routine periodic evaluation of blood chemistries and hematologic factors, as well as other indicators of patient status.
If the resealable rubber plug on the medication port is missing or partially removed, do not use product.
After removing overpouch, check for minute leaks by squeezing container firmly. If leaks are found, discard the solution because the sterility may be impaired.
After the pull ring has been removed from the outlet, check for broken connector frangible seal as evidenced by continuous fluid flow from port. A few drops of solution within the connector or protector cap may be present. If a continuous stream or droplets of fluid are noted, discard solution because sterility may be impaired.
During solution drainage, fibrin strands may be observed in the solution and may become attached to the connector frangible closure. In occasional instances, partial or complete obstruction of draining may occur. Manipulation of the connector frangible closure in the tubing may free the fibrin obstruction.

PRECAUTIONS

General:

Do not administer unless solution is clear.
Aseptic technique must be used throughout the procedure and at its termination in order to reduce the possibility of infection.
Significant losses of protein, amino acids and water soluble vitamins may occur during peritoneal dialysis. Replacement therapy should be provided as necessary.
When prescribing the solution to be used for an individual patient, consideration should be given to the potential interaction between the dialysis treatment and therapy directed at other existing illnesses. For example, rapid potassium removal may create arrhythmias in cardiac patients using digitalis or similar drugs; digitalis toxicity may be masked by elevated potassium or magnesium, or by hypocalcemia. Correction of electrolytes by dialysis may precipitate signs and symptoms of digitalis excess. Conversely, toxicity may occur at suboptimal dosages of digitalis if potassium is low or calcium high. Azotemic diabetics require careful monitoring of insulin requirements during and following dialysis with dextrose containing solutions.

Laboratory tests:

Serum electrolytes, magnesium, bicarbonate levels and fluid balance should be periodically monitored.
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility:
Long term animal studies with Dianeal® PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solution have not been performed to evaluate the carcinogenic potential, mutagenic potential or effect on fertility.

Pregnancy:

Teratogenic Effects

Pregnancy Category C.

Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with Dianeal® PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solution. It is also not known whether Dianeal® PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solution can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. Dianeal® PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solution should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.

Nursing mothers:

Caution should be exercised when Dianeal® PD-2 peritoneal dialysis solution is administered to a nursing woman.

Pediatric use:

Safety and effectiveness in children have not been established.

