BIDIL (hydralazine hydrochloride and isosorbide dinitrate) tablet, film coated 

BiDil is a fixed-dose combination of isosorbide dinitrate, a vasodilator with effects on both arteries and veins, and hydralazine hydrochloride, a predominantly arterial vasodilator.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

BiDil is contraindicated in patients who are allergic to organic nitrates.

WARNINGS

Augmentation of the vasodilatory effects of isosorbide dinitrate by phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as sildenafil, vardenafil, or tadalafil could result in severe hypotension. The time course and dose dependence of this interaction have not been studied. Reasonable supportive care should consist of those measures used to treat a nitrate overdose with elevation of the extremities and central volume expansion.

PRECAUTIONS

General

The precautions that need to be taken when using BiDil are those appropriate to each of its components.

Treatment with hydralazine hydrochloride may produce a clinical picture simulating systemic lupus erythematosus including glomerulonephritis.

If systemic lupus erythematosus-like symptoms occur in patients treated with BiDil, discontinuation of BiDil should be considered only after a thorough benefit-to-risk assessment. Symptoms and signs of systemic lupus erythematosus usually regress when hydralazine hydrochloride is discontinued but residua have been detected many years later. Long-term treatment with steroids may be necessary. (See PRECAUTIONS. Laboratory Tests.)

Symptomatic hypotension, particularly with upright posture, may occur with even small doses of BiDil. Therefore, BiDil should be used with caution in patients who may be volume depleted or who, for whatever reason, are already hypotensive.

Hydralazine hydrochloride can cause tachycardia potentially leading to myocardial ischemia and anginal attacks.

Careful clinical and hemodynamic monitoring is recommended when BiDil is administered to patients with acute myocardial infarction to avoid the hazards of hypotension and tachycardia.

Hydralazine hydrochloride has been associated with peripheral neuritis, evidenced by paresthesia, numbness, and tingling, which may be related to an antipyridoxine effect. Pyridoxine should be added to BiDil therapy if such symptoms develop.

Isosorbide dinitrate therapy may aggravate angina associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Drug/Drug Interactions

Due to the hydralazine component of BiDil, monoamine-oxidase inhibitors should be used with caution in patients receiving BiDil.

Patients treated with BiDil who receive any potent parenteral antihypertensive agent should be continuously observed for several hours for excessive fall in blood pressure.

The effects of BiDil on vasodilators including alcohol may be additive.

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION

Treatment with BiDil should be initiated at a dose of one BiDil Tablet, 3 times a day. BiDil may be titrated to a maximum tolerated dose, not to exceed two BiDil Tablets, 3 times a day.

There is no adequate experience in heart failure with doses of BiDil other than those recommended and no experience with use of individual components.

Although titration of BiDil can be rapid (3-5 days), some patients may experience side effects and may take longer to reach their maximum tolerated dose. The dosage may be decreased to as little as one-half BiDil Tablet 3 times a day if intolerable side effects occur. Efforts should be made to titrate up as soon as side effects subside.
