Drug Label for drug brand Delflex Neutral pH, containing Dextrose Monohydrate, Sodium Chloride, Calcium Chloride, Magnesium Chloride, Sodium Lactate.


CONTRAINDICATIONS


None Known


WARNINGS

Not for Intravenous injection.
Use Aseptic Technique.
It is important to mix the buffer (mini-bag) and main solutions thoroughly. Administer within 24 hours after mixing. Once solutions are mixed, medication may be added prior to administration.
Peritoneal dialysis should be done with great care, in patients with a number of conditions, including disruption of the peritoneal membrane or diaphragm by surgery or trauma, extensive adhesions, bowel distention, undiagnosed abdominal disease, abdominal wall infection, hernias or burns, fecal fistula or colostomy, tense ascites, obesity, large polycystic kidneys, recent aortic graft replacement, lactic acidosis and severe pulmonary disease. When assessing peritoneal dialysis as the mode of therapy in such extreme situations, the benefits to the patient must be weighed against the possible complications.
Solutions containing lactate ion should be used with great care in patients with metabolic or respiratory alkalosis. Lactate should be administered with great care in those conditions in which there is an increased level or an impaired utilization of this ion, such as severe hepatic insufficiency.
An accurate fluid balance record must be kept and the weight of the patient carefully monitored to avoid over or under hydration with severe consequences, including congestive heart failure, volume depletion and shock.
Excessive use of DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solution with 4.25% dextrose during a peritoneal dialysis treatment can result in significant removal of water from the patient.
Stable patients undergoing maintenance peritoneal dialysis should have routine periodic evaluation of blood chemistries and hematologic factors, as well as other indicators of patient status.
After removing the outer wrap, check for minute leaks by squeezing the container firmly. If leaks are found, discard the solution because the sterility may be impaired. (A small amount of moisture may be present inside the overwrap, which is normal condensation from the sterilization process.)
Serum calcium levels in patients using low calcium concentrations should be monitored and if found to be low, the peritoneal solution in use should be altered to one with a higher calcium concentration.


PRECAUTIONS


General:

Administer only if the solution is clear, all seals are intact, and there is no evidence of leaking. It is important to mix the buffer (mini-bag) and main solutions thoroughly. Administer within 24 hours after mixing. Once solutions are mixed, medication may be added prior to administration.
Do Not Heat In A Microwave Oven
Care should be taken to see that the catheter is inserted completely, since leakage around the catheter, if not controlled, can create edema from subcutaneous infiltration of the dialysis solution. This will also create an inaccurate fluid balance measurement.
Chronic patients that have been stabilized on peritoneal dialysis therapy should have routine evaluation of electrolyte blood chemistries and hematologic factors measured in order to determine the patient s ongoing condition.
Delflex peritoneal dialysis solutions do not include potassium. Potassium chloride should only be added under the direction of a physician after careful evaluation of both serum and total body potassium.
Check the inner bag for leaks by gently squeezing the bag before removing the outer wrap. If after applying pressure on the bag, leaks are found, do not use this solution since the sterility of the bag may be compromised.
The outer wrap must be removed immediately before use and is provided with a Tear Open feature to make removal easy. See detailed instructions in the Directions for Use section.
Aseptic technique must be used throughout the procedure and at its termination in order to reduce the possibility of infection.
Significant loss of protein, amino acids and water soluble vitamins may occur during peritoneal dialysis. Replacement therapy should be provided as necessary.

Laboratory Tests

Serum electrolytes, magnesium, bicarbonate levels and fluid balance should be periodically monitored.

Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility

Long term animal studies with DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions have not been performed to evaluate the carcinogenic potential, mutagenic potential or effect on fertility.

Pregnancy: Teratology Effects

Pregnancy Category C. Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions. It is also not known whether DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.

Nursing Mothers

Caution should be exercised when DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions are administered to a nursing woman.

Pediatric Use

Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.

