PHOSLO (calcium acetate) capsule

PhosLo acts as a phosphate binder.  Its chemical name is calcium acetate.

4  CONTRAINDICATIONS

Patients with hypercalcemia.

5  WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS

5.1 Hypercalcemia

Patients with end stage renal disease may develop hypercalcemia when treated with calcium, including calcium acetate (PhosLo®).  Avoid the use of calcium supplements, including calcium-based nonprescription antacids, concurrently with PhosLo®.

An overdose of PhosLo may lead to progressive hypercalcemia, which may require emergency measures.  Therefore, early in the treatment phase during the dosage adjustment period, monitor serum calcium levels twice weekly.  Should hypercalcemia develop, reduce the PhosLo® dosage or discontinue the treatment, depending on the severity of hypercalcemia.

More severe hypercalcemia (Ca>12 mg/dL) is associated with confusion, delirium, stupor and coma.  Severe hypercalcemia can be treated by acute hemodialysis and discontinuing PhosLo® therapy.

Mild hypercalcemia (10.5 to 11.9 mg/dL) may be asymptomatic or manifest as constipation, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting.  Mild hypercalcemia is usually controlled by reducing the PhosLo® dose or temporarily discontinuing therapy.  Decreasing or discontinuing Vitamin D therapy is recommended as well.

Chronic hypercalcemia may lead to vascular calcification and other soft-tissue calcification.  Radiographic evaluation of suspected anatomical regions may be helpful in early detection of soft tissue calcification.  The long term effect of PhosLo® on the progression of vascular or soft tissue calcification has not been determined.

Hypercalcemia (>11 mg/dL) was reported in 16% of patients in a 3-month study of a solid dose formulation of calcium acetate; all cases resolved upon lowering the dose or discontinuing treatment.

Maintain the serum calcium-phosphorus (Ca x P) product below 55 mg2/dL2.

5.2 Concomitant Use with Medications

Hypercalcemia may aggravate digitalis toxicity.

7  DRUG INTERACTIONS

The drug interaction of PhosLo® is characterized by the potential of calcium to bind to drugs with anionic functions (e.g., carboxyl and hydroxyl groups).  PhosLo® may decrease the bioavailability of tetracyclines or fluoroquinolones via this mechanism.

There are no empirical data on avoiding drug interactions between calcium acetate or PhosLo® and most concomitant drugs.  When administering an oral medication with PhosLo® where a reduction in the bioavailability of that medication would have a clinically significant effect on its safety or efficacy, administer the drug one hour before or three hours after PhosLo® or calcium acetate.  Monitor blood levels of the concomitant drugs that have a narrow therapeutic range.  Patients taking anti-arrhythmic medications for the control of arrhythmias and anti-seizure medications for the control of seizure disorders were excluded from the clinical trials with all forms of calcium acetate.

7.1 Ciprofloxacin

In a study of 15 healthy subjects, a co-administered single dose of 4 calcium acetate tablets approximately 2.7 g, decreased the bioavailability of ciprofloxacin by approximately 50%.

2  DOSAGE & ADMINISTRATION

The recommended initial dose of PhosLo® for the adult dialysis patient is 2 gelcaps with each meal.  Increase the dose gradually to lower serum phosphorus levels to the target range, as long as hypercalcemia does not develop.  Most patients require 3-4 gelcaps with each meal.
