DELFLEX (dextrose monohydrate, sodium chloride, sodium lactate, calcium chloride, magnesium chloride) solution 

The DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions, standard, low magnesium and low magnesium/low calcium, are sterile, non-pyrogenic formulations of Dextrose and Electrolytes in Water for Injection, USP, for use in peritoneal dialysis.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

None known.

WARNINGS

Not for Intravenous Injection.

Use Aseptic Technique.

Peritoneal dialysis should be done with great care, in patients with a number of conditions, including disruption of the peritoneal membrane or diaphragm by surgery or trauma, extensive adhesions, bowel distention, undiagnosed abdominal disease, abdominal wall infection, hernias or burns, fecal fistula or colostomy, tense ascites, obesity, large polycystic kidneys, recent aortic graft replacement, lactic acidosis and severe pulmonary disease. When assessing peritoneal dialysis as the mode of therapy in such extreme situations, the benefits to the patient must be weighed against the possible complications.

Solutions containing lactate ion should be used with great care in patients with metabolic or respiratory alkalosis. Lactate should be administered with great care in those conditions in which there is an increased level or an impaired utilization of this ion, such as severe hepatic insufficiency.

An accurate fluid balance record must be kept and the weight of the patient carefully monitored to avoid over or under hydration with severe consequences, including congestive heart failure, volume depletion and shock.

Excessive use of DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solution with 4.25% dextrose during a peritoneal dialysis treatment can result in significant removal of water from the patient.

Stable patients undergoing maintenance peritoneal dialysis should have routine periodic evaluation of electrolyte blood chemistries and hematologic factors, as well as other indicators that determine the patient's ongoing status.

After removing the outer wrap, check for minute leaks by squeezing the container firmly. If leaks are found, discard the solution because the sterility may be impaired.

Serum calcium levels in patients using low calcium concentrations should be monitored and if found to be low, the peritoneal solution in use should be altered to one with a higher calcium concentration.

PRECAUTIONS

General:
Do not administer unless the solution is clear, all seals are intact, and there is no evidence of leaking.

Care should be taken to see that the catheter is inserted completely, since leakage around the catheter, if not controlled, can create edema from subcutaneous infiltration of the dialysis solution. This will also create an inaccurate fluid balance measurement.

DELFLEX® Peritoneal Dialysis solutions do not include potassium. Potassium chloride should only be added under the direction of a physician after careful evaluation of both serum and total body potassium.

The overwrap must be removed immediately before use and is provided with a “Tear Open” feature to make removal easy. See instructions in Exchange Procedure section.

Disconnect from disk only when knob is in position 4.

Aseptic technique must be used throughout the procedure and at its termination in order to reduce the possibility of infection.

Significant loss of protein, amino acids and water soluble vitamins may occur during peritoneal dialysis. Replacement therapy should be provided as necessary.

Laboratory Tests:
Serum electrolytes, magnesium, bicarbonate levels and fluid balance should be periodically monitored.

Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:
Long term animal studies with DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions have not been performed to evaluate the carcinogenic potential, mutagenic potential or effect on fertility.

Pregnancy: Teratology Effects
Pregnancy Category C. Animal reproduction studies have not been conducted with DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions. It is also not known whether DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions can cause fetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman or can affect reproduction capacity. DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions should be given to a pregnant woman only if clearly needed.

Nursing Mothers:
Caution should be exercised when DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions are administered to a nursing woman.

Pediatric Use:
Safety and effectiveness in pediatric patients have not been established.

DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION

DELFLEX peritoneal dialysis solutions are provided for intraperitoneal administration only. The mode of therapy, frequency of treatment, formulation, exchange volume, duration of dwell, and length of dialysis should be selected by the physician responsible for the treatment of the individual patient.

To avoid the risk of severe dehydration or hypovolemia and to minimize the loss of protein, it is advisable to select the peritoneal dialysis solution with lowest level of osmolarity consistent with the fluid removal requirements for that exchange.

Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration whenever solution and container permit.

Additives may be incompatible. Do not store solutions containing additives.

For administration see Exchange Procedure section. 
